
The Hash Convention For Mail System Status Codes (HCMSSC)

INTERNET-DRAFT   draft-bernstein-hcmssc-02.txt   (expires 1 August 1997)

   This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Status of this memo

   This memo provides information for the Internet community. This memo
   does not specify an Internet standard of any kind. Distribution of
   this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   RFC 1893 defines codes for mail delivery failures. For example,
   code 5.1.1 means that the specified mailbox does not exist.

   The qmail package sprays these codes all over the place, by adding a
   code to the text of every error message, preceded by a hash mark and
   surrounded by parentheses. It avoids using hash marks elsewhere.


The Hash Convention For Mail System Status Codes (HCMSSC)
D. J. Bernstein, djb@pobox.com
19970201


1. Introduction

   RFC 1893 defines codes for mail delivery failures. For example,
   code 5.1.1 means that the specified mailbox does not exist.

   The qmail package sprays these codes all over the place, by adding a
   code to the text of every error message, preceded by a hash mark and
   surrounded by parentheses. It avoids using hash marks elsewhere.


2. Examples

   Here is a typical HCMSSC SMTP error message:

      421 load average too high, please come back later (#4.3.2)

   Here is part of a typical HCMSSC bounce message:

      <mail-loop@silverton.berkeley.edu>:
      This is looping; it already has my Delivered-To line. (#5.7.1)

   But qmail doesn't use HCMSSC when it repeats another MTA's error
   message:

      <foo@heaven.af.mil>:
      127.3.4.5 does not like recipient.
      Remote host said: 550 <foo>... User unknown (#5.1.1)


3. Security considerations

   Don't take drastic action upon seeing "(#"; it might not be HCMSSC.
