MSGTRK BOF                             G. Jones [gbjones@mitre.org]
INTERNET-DRAFT                         B. Ernst [bruce_ernst@lotus.ssw.com]
draft-ietf-jones-msgtrk-def-00.txt     G. Vaudreuil [gregv@ons.octel.com]
Expires: February 1999





                 Basic Definition of Message Tracking


Status of this Memo

This document is an  Internet  Draft.  Internet  Drafts  are working
documents  of  the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,   
and its Working Groups. Note that other groups  may  also  distribute   
working documents as Internet Drafts. 

Internet Drafts are draft  documents  valid  for  a  maximum  of  six   
months.  Internet  Drafts  may  be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by   
other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to  use  Internet   
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
draft" or "work in progress."

To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts     
Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern 
Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu(US West Coast).


Abstract

This document defines message tracking as a prelude to the creation of 
a message tracking model. Message tracking is a messaging  management 
function; it provides the ability to find out, after the fact, the path 
that a particular message took through the messaging  system, the current 
status of that message, and its characteristics.


Definition

Message tracking refers, in its simplest form, to determining the path an 
RFC822 message has taken, its current location, and its characteristics. 
Message tracking allows the originator of a message to issue a request 
about a previously sent message, the answer to which contains the delivery
status, delivery time, delivered recipients, and other information about 
the message. This is different from the delivery status notification (DSN) 
function in use today, because DSNs are requested at the time of submission
and are generated automatically; alternatively a tracking request is 
generated independently of the previously submitted message's status and is
done so on demand. 

This capability is  analogous to the service provided by carriers of 
conventional paper mail - the  ability to quickly locate where a package is, 
and to determine whether or not  the package has been delivered to its
destination. An Internet-standard approach will allow development of  
message tracking applications that can operate in a multi-vendor messaging
environment, and will encourage operation of the function across 
administrative boundaries.

One might ask: why should there be a standard for message tracking when 
Internet domains will be unwilling to open themselves up to outside 
tracking requests ?  This is one reason why we design and implement 
Internet standards. So that there is a reliable, secure, agreed upon 
mechanism for message tracking that people will be willing to use. 

Companies have implemented and are implementing message tracking today. 
Standardization of this technique will aid the Internet user community, 
make Internet messaging more profitable, and fulfill a key messaging 
management need.


Reasons for Message Tracking

Message tracking is useful for determining the whereabouts and status of 
"lost" messages, and for several other purposes:

o When there is a lack of trust in the messaging system, such as when an 
originator claims a message failed to be delivered, the point of failure 
may be isolated. This includes messages that were never delivered or 
messages that were delivered incorrectly. Message tracking thus adds to the 
overall reliability of the mail system;

o Per-message information can be used for accounting, billing, and 
performance purposes. Traffic can be itemized on a per-origin or per-
destination basis by system or originator. This typically involves two
steps - collection of message traffic data, followed by the gehe time they 
are submitted to an MTA up until the time a network of MTAs discharges the 
message onward to another entity (e.g. a proprietary mail server, IMAP 
server, and so on).

o Message tracking information adds security in that the origins of  
potential security threats can be more precisely determined. If a system 
were flooded with traffic, for instance, the origin of this traffic would
become known. Message tracking information is suitable for routine security 
audits containing the details of messaging traffic over specific time 
intervals;

o End-to-end delivery time could be measured;

o Message tracking would aid in message loop detection, since unique 
message identifiers of looping messages, when these exist, would be 
recorded multiple times;

o Performance characteristics about the type of messaging traffic could be 
determined, such as when an inbound message causes the creation of multiple 
outbound messages, and the percentage of messages that were actually 
delivery reports or receipts.  This is valuable for performance 
measurement, among other reasons;

o Standardized message tracking information acts as a bridge between 
dissimilar messaging systems and dissimilar messaging communities;


Tracking Messages on the Public Internet

One might ask: why bother to track messages if a majority of public 
Internet traffic is point to point; messages don't live long enough to be 
trackable, and are not an interesting event to track since you always 
know the next point ? Just because you know where a message went that 
doesn't mean you know what happened to it, how fast it got there, or what 
was in it. As the Internet is used more and more for commercial/official 
purposes a logging function is commonly embedded in the messaging system 
internally. Even if most of the message traffic is point to point, this 
point-to-point traffic is inter-domain, across firewalls, and thus it is 
even more important to have a reliable tracking mechanism that 
organizations can agree on. It is something that intra-domain messaging 
users want. Even if 95% of transactions are point to point, the 5% that is 
non point-to-point is still a huge amount of traffic, and this is exactly 
the traffic that users will want to track. Once messaging traffic enters an 
intranet or domain of any size it invariably encounters a more hierarchical 
routing structure. 


Who is Allowed to Track Messages

Only the originators of messages are allowed to track their messages. 
Optionally, an originator may delegate this responsibility to a third 
party, but this is left for future study.


How Tracking is Done: Requests and Responses

The originator will issue a message tracking request using the Unique 
Message Identifier plus security information. The originator (of both 
the message and the query at this point) will receive optional response 
criteria such as the message disposition, delivered recipients, delivery 
time, and the names of MTAs that handled the message.


Security for Message Originators

One option for message security is that the originator calculates a hash A 
to be equal to the hash of the message ID + time stamp + a per-user secret.
The user then calculates hash B to be the hash of A. The user includes B in
the submitted message, and retains A. Later, when the user makes a message 
tracking request to the messaging system or tracking entity, it submits A 
in the racking request. The entity receiving the tracking request then uses 
A to calculate B, since it was already provided B, verifying that the 
requestor is authentic. Summarily

A = H(message ID + time stamp + secret)
B = H(A)

If the originator of a message were to delegate his or her tracking request
to a third party by sending them A, this would be vulnerable to snooping 
over unencrypted sessions, but the user can decide on a message-by-message
basis if this risk is acceptable.


Three Possible Architectures

There are ways of accomplishing message tracking without mandating the 
addition of large amounts of new infrastructure on the participants. 
Optionally, if more infrastructure is proven to be a good and necessary 
thing, it should be considered. 

In all cases, messages are only tracked from the time they are submitted 
to an MTA up until the time a network of MTAs discharges the message 
onward to another entity (e.g. a proprietary mail server, IMAP server, and 
so on).

The three architectural alternatives offered by the start-up working group 
to date might be called "ask later", "ask now", and "ask someone else." 

Under "ask later", a user requests tracking as a service when submitting a 
message, and then at a later time issues a separate tracking request to the
mail system. The user receives a response to the request from the tracking
entity. This has the advantage of being deployable within the existing SMTP 
infrastructure.

Under "ask now", a user requests tracking as a service while submitting a 
message, and receives a step-by-step report contemporaneously from each MTA
that handles the message. This provides the user with a high level of 
service, but also causes extra overhead: an additional message generated 
for each hop the original message takes.

Under "ask someone else", the user issues a separate message tracking 
request to an entity other than the messaging system at a later time. 
The user receives a response to the request from this same third-party 
tracking entity. This has the advantage of allowing tracking to occur when
the messaging process has failed but the platform is still working. It also 
off-loads the tracking function from the messaging system itself. It may, 
however, require new infrastructure in order to support it.

One possibility would be to implement "ask now" and "ask later" as SMTP 
extensions. One could implement "ask someone else" as a UDP- or TCP-based
protocol, among other options.


Acknowledgments

Thanks to all those who participated in the message tracking meetings.
Many thanks to Ned Freed and Harald Alvesrand for the hashing material.


Internet Draft              Expires February 1999           Internet Draft



