

A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 2197:  

        Title:      SMTP Service Extension for Command Pipelining
	Author:     N. Freed
        Category:   Draft Standard Protocol		
	Date:       September 1997
        Mailbox:    ned.freed@innosoft.com
        Pages:      8
        Characters: 15003
        Obsoletes:  1854


        URL:        ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc2197.txt


This memo defines an extension to the SMTP service whereby a
server can indicate the extent of its ability to accept
multiple commands in a single TCP send operation. Using a
single TCP send operation for multiple commands can improve
SMTP performance significantly.

This document is a product of the Messaging Extensions Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Draft Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.


This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@ISI.EDU.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@ISI.EDU with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@ISI.EDU
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to admin@DS.INTERNIC.NET.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.

Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@ISI.EDU.  Please consult RFC 1543, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


Joyce K. Reynolds and Alegre Ramos
USC/Information Sciences Institute

