
Network Working Group                                           E. Burger
Internet Draft                                         SnowShore Networks
Document: draft-ietf-vpim-cc-02.txt                            E. Candell
Category: Standards Track                        Comverse Network Systems
Expires May 2001                                        November 24, 2000
 
 
                   Critical Content of Internet Mail 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   One can access the list of current Internet-Drafts at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   One can access the list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This document is a work product of the IETF Voice Profile for 
   Internet Mail (vpim) Work Group.  The URL for the VPIM website is 
   <http://www.vpim.org>. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   This document describes a mechanism for identifying the body parts 
   that the sender deems critical in a multi-part Internet mail 
   message. 
    
   By knowing what parts of a message the sender deems critical, a MTA 
   or UA can intelligently handle multi-part messages when gatewaying 
   (MTA) or presenting (UA) to systems of lesser capability. Critical 
   content can help a smart gateway decide what parts to forward.  It 
   can indicate how hard a gateway should try to deliver a body part.  
   It can help an MTA to select body parts to silently delete when a 
   system of lesser capability receives a message.  In addition, 
   critical content can help indicate the notification strategy of the 
   receiving system. 
    


 
                           Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 1] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
Table of Contents 
    
1.  ABSTRACT .........................................................1 
2.  CONVENTIONS USED IN THIS DOCUMENT ................................2 
3.  INTRODUCTION .....................................................3 
4.  CONTENT-CRITICALITY ENTITY .......................................5 
4.1.  CRITICAL .......................................................6 
4.2.  IGNORE .........................................................6 
4.3.  Other Values ...................................................6 
4.4.  Summary ........................................................7 
5.  STATUS CODE ......................................................7 
6.  BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY CONSIDERATIONS ............................8 
7.  MIME INTERACTIONS ................................................8 
7.1.  multipart/alternative ..........................................8 
7.2.  multipart/related ..............................................9 
7.3.  message/rfc822 .................................................9 
8.  IMPLEMENTATION EXAMPLES ..........................................9 
8.1.  Content Gateways ...............................................9 
8.2.  Non-Traditional UA ............................................10 
9.  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS .........................................11 
10. COLLECTED SYNTAX ................................................11 
11. REFERENCES ......................................................11 
12. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .................................................12 
13. AUTHOR'S ADDRESSES ..............................................13 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   This document refers generically to the sender of a message in the 
   masculine (he/him/his) and the recipient of the message in the 
   feminine (she/her/hers).  This convention is purely for convenience 
   and makes no assumption about the gender of a message sender or 
   recipient. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
   FORMATTING NOTE: Notes, such at this one, provide additional 
   nonessential information that the reader may skip without missing 
   anything essential.  The primary purpose of these non-essential 
   notes is to convey information about the rationale of this document, 
   or to place this document in the proper historical or evolutionary 
   context.  Readers whose sole purpose is to construct a conformant 
   implementation may skip such information.  However, it may be of use 
   to those who wish to understand why we made certain design choices. 
    
    

  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 2] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
3. Introduction 
    
   This document describes the Critical Content identification for 
   multi-part Internet mail. 
    
   The need for a critical content identification mechanism comes about 
   because of the internetworking of Internet mail systems with legacy 
   messaging systems that do not fulfil all of the semantics of 
   Internet mail.  Such legacy systems have a limited ability to render 
   all parts of a given message.  This document will use the case of an 
   Internet mail system exchanging electronic messages with a legacy 
   voice messaging system for illustrative purposes. 
    
   Electronic mail has historically been text-centric.  Extensions such 
   as MIME [3] enable the desktop to send and receive multi-part, 
   multimedia messages.  Popular multimedia data types include binary 
   word processing documents, binary business presentation graphics, 
   voice, and video. 
    
   Voice mail has historically been audio-centric.  Many voice-
   messaging systems only render voice.  Extensions such as fax enable 
   the voice mail system to send and receive fax images as well as 
   create multi-part voice and fax messages.  A few voice mail systems 
   can render text using text-to-speech or text-to-fax technology.  
   Although theoretically possible, none can today render video. 
    
   An important aspect of the interchange between voice messaging 
   services and desktop e-mail client applications is that the 
   rendering capability of the voice-messaging platform is often much 
   less than the rendering capability of a desktop e-mail client.  In 
   the e-mail case, the sender has the expectation that the recipient 
   receives all components of a multimedia message.  This is so even if 
   the recipient cannot render all body parts.  In most cases, the 
   recipient can either find the appropriate rendering tool or tell the 
   sender that she cannot read the particular attachment. 
    
   This is an important issue.  By definition, a MIME-enabled user 
   agent, conforming to [4] will present or make available all of the 
   body parts to the recipient.  However, a voice mail system may not 
   be capable of storing non-voice objects.  Moreover, the voice mail 
   system may not be capable of notifying the recipient that there were 
   undeliverable message parts. 
    
   The inability of the receiving system to render a body part is 
   usually a permanent failure.  Retransmission of the message will not 
   improve the likelihood of a future successful delivery.  Contrast 
   this to the case with normal data delivery.  Traditional message 
   failures, such as a garbled message or disabled link will benefit 
   from retransmission. 
    
   This situation is fundamentally different from normal Internet mail.  
   In the Internet mail case, either the system delivered the message, 
  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 3] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
   or it didn't.  There is no concept of a system partially delivering 
   a message. 
    
   In addition, the sender would not mind if the system did not deliver 
   non-critical parts of a message.  In fact, the sender's user agent 
   may be silently adding body parts to a message unbeknownst to the 
   sender.  For example, take Microsoft Outlook as a user agent.  
   Outlook often will attach a TNEF section or other body parts. If the 
   receiving system rejected the message because it could not render 
   TNEF, the sender would be understandably confused and upset. 
    
   Thus, there is a need for a method of indicating to a Mail Transfer 
   Agent (MTA) or User Agent (UA) that the sender considers parts of a 
   message to be critical.  From the sender's perspective, he would not 
   consider the message delivered if the system did not deliver the 
   critical parts. 
    
   One method of indicating critical content of a message is to define 
   a profile.  The profile defines discard rules based on knowledge of 
   the user population for silently deleting body parts.  Citing the 
   example above, a voice profile can easily declare that MTAs or UAs 
   can silently delete TNEF data and yet consider the message 
   successfully delivered.  This is, in fact, the approach taken by 
   VPIMv2 [5]. 
    
   Since one aspect of the issue is deciding when to notify the sender 
   that the system cannot deliver part of a message, one could use a 
   partial non-delivery notification mechanism [6] to indicate a 
   problem with delivering a given body part.  However, this requires 
   the user request a MDN.  Moreover, the sender will receive PNDN 
   failures for objects the sender may not be aware he is sending.  An 
   example would be the TNEF part. 
    
   Summarizing the needs, we need a mechanism that will let the sender 
   or sender's UA mark body parts he considers critical to the message 
   that the system must deliver.  The mechanism MUST NOT burden the 
   sender with failure notifications for non-critical body parts.  The 
   mechanism MUST conform to the general notification status request 
   mechanism for positive or negative notification.  When requested, 
   the mechanism MUST indicate to the sender when a receiving system 
   cannot deliver a critical body part. 
    
   In short, we need a method of letting the sender indicate what body-
   parts he considers to be critical. 
    
   This document describes a Critical Content marking mechanism that 
   satisfies these needs.  Following the format for Internet message 
   bodies [3], this document introduces the Content-Criticality body 
   part header.  Values for this header are CRITICAL, NOTIFY, or 
   IGNORE.  The receiving MTA or UA will generate a delivery status 
   notification (DSN) [7] or Message Disposition Notification (MDN) [8] 
   at delivery time or reading time if it receives a request for 
  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 4] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
   notification and the (non-)delivery status of the parts marked 
   NOTIFY meet the criteria for notification.   
    
   NOTE: A straightforward alternative implementation method for 
   marking a body part critical is to use a content-disposition 
   parameter called "criticality". 
    
   NOTE: We could have made the critical content indicator a parameter 
   to content-disposition.  This has the benefit of being very easy for 
   IMAP servers to implement.  In particular, IMAP servers 
   automatically present the content-disposition entity when a UA 
   requests information on a message.  On the other hand, the UA must 
   explicitly request the presence and value of different entities, 
   such as content-criticality.  However, implementing the critical 
   content indicator as a parameter to content-disposition overloads 
   the meaning of the entity.  Moreover, IMAP servers can present, in 
   the future, content-criticality by default.  Lastly, most UA's that 
   have interest in content-criticality will explicitly request the 
   header in any event. 
    
    
4. Content-Criticality Entity 
    
   The Content-Criticality field is a MIME body part header inserted by 
   the sending UA to indicate to the receiving MTA or UA whether to 
   consider this body part critical. 
    
   A CRITICAL body part is one the sender requires the receiving system 
   to deliver for him to consider the message delivered. 
    
   An IGNORE body part is one the sender doesn't care whether the 
   receiving system delivers it or not.  The receiving system can 
   silently delete such body parts if the receiving system cannot 
   deliver the part. 
    
   The terms "entity" and "body part" have the meanings defined in [3]. 
    
   One obvious application of critical content is generating a 
   (non-)delivery message.  If the value of the field is IGNORE, the 
   receiving MTA or UA MUST NOT generate a notification.  If the value 
   of the field is CRTITICAL, the receiving MTA or UA will generate a 
   notification, based on the normal notification request mechanisms.  
   Normal notification request mechanisms include the SMTP RCPT NOTIFY 
   command [9] and the Disposition-Notification-To header [8]. 
    
   For example, if the sending system requests a notification, and a 
   CRITICAL part fails, the receiving system will generate a NDN for 
   the whole message.  Conversely, if only an IGNORE part fails, the 
   receiving system will not generate a NDN.  
    
   The next sections examine the actions taken by an MTA or UA given 
   the different values of Content-Criticality. 
  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 5] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
    
   NOTE: This implies that the MTA must examine the entire message on 
   receipt to determine whether it needs to generate a notification.  
   However, the MTA need not examine the message if it knows it can 
   store and forward all media types.  Said differently, Internet e-
   mail MTA can, by default, handle any arbitrary MIME-encapsulated 
   type.  Some voice mail systems, on the other hand, cannot store 
   binary attachments at all, such as application/ms-word.  The voice 
   mail MTA, in this example, would be scanning for non-renderable body 
   parts in any event.  
    
  4.1. CRITICAL 
    
   "Content-Criticality: CRITICAL" signifies that this body part is 
   critical to the sender. 
    
   If the receiving system cannot render or store a body part marked 
   CRITICAL, then the entire message has failed.  In this case, the 
   receiving system MUST take the appropriate failure action. 
    
   NOTE: We say "appropriate action", because the sender may have 
   suppressed all notifications.  In this case, the appropriate action 
   is to simply discard the message. 
    
  4.2. IGNORE 
    
   "Content-Criticality: IGNORE" signifies that the sender does not 
   care about notification reports for this body part. 
    
   If the receiving system cannot render or store a body part marked 
   IGNORE, the receiving system may silently delete the body part.  The 
   receiving system MUST NOT return a delivery failure, unless parts 
   marked IMPORTANT or CRITICAL have also failed. 
    
  4.3. Other Values 
    
   The receiving system MUST treat unrecognized values as CRITICAL.  
   This is to provide backward compatibility with future uses of the 
   Content-Criticality entity. 
    
   The most likely new value is IMPORTANT.  An IMPORTANT body part is 
   something the sender wants the receiver to get, but would not want 
   the message rejected outright if the IMPORTANT body part fails.  A 
   receiving system that does not understand IMPORTANT MUST take the 
   default value of CRITICAL.  In this case, the MTA or UA MUST take 
   the conservative action of rejecting the message. 
     





  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 6] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
  4.4. Summary 
    
   The following table summarizes the actions expected of a conforming 
   MTA or UA. 
    
   NOTE: This section is normative: it suggests what to put into the 
   DSN or MDN.  
                            +--------------------------------------+ 
                            |    Sending UA Has Marked Body Part   | 
                            |---------------------+----------------| 
                            |      CRITICAL       |     IGNORE     | 
       +--------------------+---------------------+----------------+ 
       | Body Part is       |                     |                | 
       | Deliverable/read   | Appropriate Action  |     ignore     | 
       +--------------------+---------------------+----------------+ 
       | Body Part is       |                     |                | 
       | Undeliverable /    |                     |                | 
       |  Unreadable        | Fail Entire Message |     ignore     | 
       +--------------------+--------------------------------------+ 
    
   The distinction between deliverable/read is as follows.  A MTA can 
   determine if a body part is deliverable.  If the body part is not 
   deliverable and is critical, the MTA could generate a DSN.  An 
   example of such a MTA is a content-converting gateway. 
    
   An UA can determine if a body part is readable.  If the body part is 
   not readable and is critical the UA could generate a MDN.  
    
   The "Appropriate Action" is the action the MTA or UA would take 
   given the context of execution.  For example, if a sender requests 
   return receipt and the receiver reads a CRITICAL body part, the 
   receiving UA must generate the appropriate MDN (following the rules 
   for MDN).  Likewise, if the MTA or UA cannot deliver the body part 
   and the body part is critical, the MTA or UA MUST generate the 
   appropriate DSN or MDN.  
    
   "Ignore" means the MTA or UA MUST ignore the operation on the body 
   part.  The MTA or UA MUST treat the message as if the body part was 
   not present in the message. 
    
    
5. Status Code 
    
   The critical content indication, in itself, does not guarantee any 
   notification.  Notification follows the rules described in [7] and 
   [8]. 
    
   NOTE: The content of actual DSNs or MDNs are beyond the scope of 
   this document.  This document only specifies how to mark a critical 
   body part.  On the other hand, we do envision sensible DSN and MDN 
   contents.  For example, DSNs should include the appropriate failure 

  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 7] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
   code as enumerated in [10].  Likewise, MDNs should include the 
   failure code in the MDN "Failure:" field. 
    
   If the receiving system is to generate a notification based on its 
   inability to render or store the media type, the notification MUST 
   include the status code 5.6.1, "Media not supported", from [10]. 
 
    
    
6. Backward Compatibility Considerations 
    
   If there are no Content-Criticality entities in the message, the 
   default value for Content-Criticality is CRITICAL.  The standard 
   notification mechanisms work for sending user agents (UA) that do 
   not know about the content notification entity.  All body parts are 
   critical, because they have the default marking of CRITICAL. 
    
   If there is at least one Content-Criticality entity in the message, 
   the default value for unspecified body parts is IGNORE.  The 
   philosophy is that UAs, especially manually constructed messages, 
   will explicitly mark the critical body parts. 
    
   NOTE: We could choose the default value for Content-Criticality to 
   be IGNORE.  This would make VPIMv2 automatically compliant with this 
   document, as VPIMv2 has provision to silently delete undeliverable 
   parts.  However, VPIMv2 systems should not be receiving arbitrary e-
   mail from the Internet.  If they do, they should be compliant with 
   this series of documents.  By defaulting to CRITICAL, this draft is 
   compliant with the rest of the Internet infrastructure. 
    
   NOTE: Some VPIMv2 implementations can receive arbitrary e-mail from 
   the Internet.  However, these systems are really acting in the 
   capacity of an Internet Voice Mail system.  In this case, one would 
   expect the implementation to provide Internet Voice Mail semantics 
   to Internet Voice Mail messages. 
    
 
7. MIME Interactions 
    
  7.1. multipart/alternative 
    
   Content-Criticality is only in effect for the selected alternative.  
   If the selected alternative has the critical content indicator, then 
   the entire alternative takes on the criticality indicated.  That is, 
   if the alternative selected has Content-Criticality: IGNORE, then 
   the receiving system MUST NOT generate any delivery notifications 
   (MDN, NDN, return-receipt, etc.). 
    
   It is unlikely for a selected alternative to fail, as the receiving 
   UA presumably picks the alternative specifically because it can 
   render it.  
    
  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 8] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
   If the selected alternative is a message/rfc822 that encloses a 
   multipart MIME message or the selected alternative is itself a 
   multipart MIME type, the individual top-level body parts follow the 
   Content-Criticality mechanism described in this document. 
    
  7.2. multipart/related 
    
   Content-Criticality fits in rather well with the multipart/related 
   construction.  For example, consider a multipart/related message 
   consisting of a Macintosh data fork and a Macintosh resource fork.  
   For a Microsoft Word document, the data fork is likely to be 
   critical.  The receiving system can safely ignore the resource fork. 
    
  7.3. message/rfc822 
    
   Content-Criticality only affects the outermost level of the message 
   or, in the case of multipart/alternative, the outermost level of the 
   selected alternative.  Specifically, the receiving system ignores 
   Content-Criticality indicators in embedded body parts.  This avoids 
   the situation of a forwarded message triggering or suppressing 
   undesired or desired reporting. 
    
    
8. Implementation Examples 
    
   This section is not a normative part of the definition of Content-
   Criticality.  However, we hope it helps implementers to understand 
   the mechanics of the Content-Criticality mechanism. 
    
   We will examine two cases.  They are how a content gateway processes 
   a message and how a UA processes a message. 
    
  8.1. Content Gateways 
    
   Content gateways examine the contents of a message from a first 
   network before the gateway forwards the message to a second network.  
   For the purposes of this example, we assume the second network has 
   less capability than the first network.  In particular, we expect 
   there will be certain message body types that the gateway cannot 
   pass onto the second network. 
    
   Consider a gateway between the Internet and a text-only short 
   message service.  A message comes through the gateway containing a 
   text part and a tnef part.  The sender marks the text part CRITICAL.  
   The gateway, knowing the capability of the short message service, 
   silently deletes the non-critical, tnef part, passing the critical 
   content to the shore message service network.  Any subsequent 
   notifications, such as failure notices or delivery notices, follow 
   the normal rules for notification. 
    
   Note the gateway, by silently deleting non-critical content, may 
   affect proprietary message correlation schemes.  One can envision 
  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                    [Page 9] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
   the sending UA inserting a body part for tracking purposes.  By 
   deleting non-critical content, the content gateway will break such a 
   scheme.  If a sending UA understands how to mark critical content, 
   it should use Internet standard mechanisms for tracking messages, 
   such as Message-ID [11]. 
    
   What if no body parts have critical content indicators?  In this 
   case, the entire message is critical.  Thus, when the gateway sees 
   the tnef part, it will reject the entire message, generating a DSN 
   with a status code 5.6.1, "Media not supported". 
    
   Likewise, consider a three part message with a text annotation (part 
   1) to a voice message (part 2) with a vCard [12] (part 3).  The 
   sender marks the first two parts CRITICAL.  Now, let us assume the 
   receiving MTA (gateway) is a voice mail only system, without even 
   the capability to store text.  In this case, the gateway (receiving 
   MTA) will reject the message, generating a DSN with a status code 
   5.6.1, "Media not supported". 
 
  8.2. Non-Traditional UA 
    
   For this example, we will examine the processing of a three-part 
   message.  The first part is a text annotation of the second part, an 
   audio message.  The third part is the sender's vCard.  The sender 
   marks the first and second parts CRITICAL.  In addition, the sender 
   marks the message for read receipt. 
    
   For the purposes of example, the telephone user interface (TUI) does 
   not perform text-to-speech conversion.  A TUI is a mail user agent 
   (UA) that uses DTMF touch-tone digits for input and audio for output 
   (display). 
    
   The TUI is unable to render the first part of the message, the text 
   part.  In addition, it is unable to render the third part of the 
   message, the vCard part.  Since the sender did not mark the third 
   part of the message CRITICAL, the system ignores the failure of the 
   TUI to render the third part of the message.  However, since the 
   sender did mark the first part CRITICAL, and the TUI is unable to 
   render text, the message fails. 
    
   What happens next is implementation dependent.  If the TUI is part 
   of a unified messaging system, a reasonable action is to hold the 
   message for the user.  The user can access the message at a later 
   time from a terminal that can render all of the critical body parts.  
   It would be reasonable for the TUI to notify the user about the 
   message. 
    
   If the TUI is part of a voice messaging system, or if the user does 
   not subscribe to a text-to-speech service, a reasonable action is 
   for the TUI to return a MDN with the disposition "failed" and the 
   failure modifier "5.6.1 (Media not supported)". 
    
  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                   [Page 10] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
    
9. Security Considerations 
 
   Receiving systems and users should not place any authentication 
   value on the Content-Criticality entity.  Just because a message has 
   a particular Content-Criticality value doesn't mean that the message 
   really originated at a given type of system. 
    
    
10. Collected Syntax 
    
   The format of the collected syntax is in accordance with the ABNF of 
   [13].  Note that per RFC 2045, none of the strings are case 
   sensitive. 
    
    
        "Content-Criticality" ":" notification-type CRLF 
    
        notification-type = "CRITICAL" / "IGNORE" 
    
    
 
11. References 
    
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   3  Freed, N. and Borenstein, N., "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
      Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", 
      RFC 2045, Innosoft and First Virtual, November 1996. 
    
   4  Freed, N. and Borenstein, N., "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
      Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046, Innosoft and 
      First Virtual, November 1996. 
    
   5  Vaudreuil, G. and Parsons, G., "Voice Profile for Internet Mail - 
      version 2", RFC 2321, Lucent Technologies and Nortel Networks, 
      September 1998. 
    
   6  Burger, E., "Partial Non-Delivery Notification", Work in 
      Progress, draft-ema-burger-pndn-01.txt, March 2000. 
    
   7  Moore, K. and Vaudreuil, G., "An Extensible Message Format for 
      Delivery Status Notifications", RFC 1894, University of Tennessee 
      and Octel Network Services, January 1996. 
     


  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                   [Page 11] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
 
   8  Fajman, R., "An Extensible Message Format for Message Disposition 
      Notifications", RFC 2298, National Institutes of Health, March 
      1998. 
    
   9  Moore, K., "SMTP Service Extension for Delivery Status 
      Notifications", RFC 1981, University of Tennessee, January 1996. 
    
   10 Vaudreuil, G., "Enhanced Mail System Status Codes", RFC 1893, 
      Octel Network Services, January 1996. 
    
   11 Crocker, D., "Standard for the Format of ARPA Internet Text 
      Messages", RFC 822, University of Delaware, August 1982. 
    
   12 Dawson, F. and Howes, T., "vCard MIME Directory Profile", RFC 
      2426, Lotus Development Corporation and Netscape Communications, 
      September 1998. 
    
   13 Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
      Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and 
      Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997. 
    
    
    
    
12. Acknowledgments 
    
   We'd like to thank Ned Freed for pointing out that this mechanism 
   was about criticality, not notification per se.  That insight made 
   the concept and descriptions infinitely more straightforward.  If 
   it's still confusing, it's our fault! 
    
   We'd also like to thank Keith Moore for helping us tighten-up our 
   explanations. 
    
   Dropping the IMPORTANT critical content type took away one of the 
   reasons for partial non-delivery notification.  That makes Jutta 
   Degener very happy! 
    
   Harald Alvestrand and Chris Newman suggested we add implementation 
   examples, which we did. 
    
    









  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                   [Page 12] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
13. Author's Addresses 
    
   Eric Burger 
   SnowShore Networks 
   c/o CRV 
   1000 Winter St. 
   Waltham, MA  02451 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1 703/304-3883 
   Email: e.burger@ieee.org 
    
    
   Emily Candell 
   Comverse Network Systems 
   200 Quannapowitt Pkwy. 
   Wakefield, MA  01880 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1 781/213-2324 
   Email: emily@comversens.com 
    
    





























  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                   [Page 13] 
                  Critical Content of Internet Mail      November 2000   
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to  
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
   Copyright (C) 2000 The Internet Society.  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 





  
Burger and Candell         Expires 5/24/01                   [Page 14] 

